README.md, before:

# SAM - System Architecture Mapper

SAM is a tool designed to map a network based on the data log of a router.
It runs as a local python-based server and displays the a map and statistics on the browser.

## Prerequisites

MySQL - SAM will support other databases in the future:

    apt-get install mysql-server
    apt-get install libmysqlclient-dev

Python - python-dev is needed to build the MySQLdb package

    apt-get install python
    apt-get install python-dev

Pip - _optional_, but convenient for installing python packages

    apt-get install python-pip

nfdump - _optional_, for importing Cisco binary NetFlow dumps

    apt-get install nfdump

## Installation

1. Clone the repository
2. Run `pip install -r requirements.txt` from within the directory. (Or do so manually--See text file for package names)
3. Duplicate `dbconfig.py` as `dbconfig_local.py` and fill out database credentials

## Usage

1. Import log files into database by any combination of the following methods:
   1. Palo Alto logs: `import_paloalto.py <file>`. The [paloalto syslog](https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/documentation/61/pan-os/pan-os/reports-and-logging/syslog-field-descriptions.html) format is expected.
   2. nfdumps: `import_nfdump.py <file>` Binary files from **nfcapd** are expected. nfdump must be installed.

   Import from all files before going to step 2
2. Run the preprocessing script `python preprocess.py` to analyze and organize the data

3. Start the server locally by running: `python server.py`

4. Navigate your browser to localhost:8080 and use your mouse to explore the network map

Commit message:

link to website, minor instruction tweaks

README.md, after:

# SAM - System Architecture Mapper

SAM is a tool designed to map a network based on the data log of a router.
It runs as a local python-based server and displays the a map and statistics on the browser.

Check out the [website](http://sam.centralus.cloudapp.azure.com) for details about the project and a demo!

## Prerequisites

MySQL - SAM will support other databases in the future:

    apt-get install mysql-server
    apt-get install libmysqlclient-dev

Python - python-dev is needed to build the MySQLdb package

    apt-get install python
    apt-get install python-dev

Pip - for installing python packages

    apt-get install python-pip

nfdump - _optional_, for importing Cisco binary NetFlow dumps

    apt-get install nfdump

## Installation

1. Clone the repository
2. Run `pip install -r requirements.txt` from within the directory to install necessary packages.
3. Duplicate `dbconfig.py` as `dbconfig_local.py` and fill out database credentials

## Usage

1. Import log files into database by any combination of the following methods:
   1. Palo Alto logs: `import_paloalto.py <file>`. The [paloalto syslog](https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/documentation/61/pan-os/pan-os/reports-and-logging/syslog-field-descriptions.html) format is expected.
   2. nfdumps: `import_nfdump.py <file>` Binary files from **nfcapd** are expected. nfdump must be installed.

   Import from all files before going to step 2
2. Run the preprocessing script `python preprocess.py` to analyze and organize the data

3. Start the server locally by running: `python server.py`

4. Navigate your browser to localhost:8080 and use your mouse to explore the network map
